meanwhile EU foreign ministers have
called on Israel to respect a ruling by
the top United Nations Court ordering it
to stop its military offensive in Rafa
at a meeting in Brussels the official
said Israel needs to explain how it's
going to comply with the decision DW's
Rosie Berard has
more these protesters rallying outside
the venue in Brussels say Israel has
crossed a red line with strikes on Rafa
despite the world Court's order to Halt
operations there words of condemnation
are also heard insight there is no safe
place in Gaza touching and refugees scam
and killing and burning more than 40
people among them many childrens you can
imagine how horrified we are all of us
for this set events for the first time
since the October 7th attacks by Hamas
and the ensuing bombardment of Gaza EU
members decided to demand details from
Israel on its compliance with its human
rights obligations and an explanation of
how it will comply with the recent
ruling on
Rafa these provisional court orders are
binding and of course they must be
followed we are currently experiencing
the opposite International humanitarian
law applies to everyone and this is also
valid for Israeli
Warfare some ministers have been pushing
for tougher measures I would say we have
an ultimatum of 5 days a week or 10 days
maximum where you have to fulfill this
and this and this and if not then we
have to take sanctions this is for me
what would be my proposal on the table
but that's unlikely to happen due to EU
unanimity rules and its unpopularity
with Israeli officials as regard to the
EU member states who might want to put
some sanctions on this topic again why
would you do that why would you reward
terrorism in the face of what is
happening right now we have seen
yesterday Rockets from r going into
Israeli territory all the way up to Tel
Aviv so I really want to see who cannot
justify going in there EU members also
approved a plan to revive their Rafa
border assistance Mission seen in this
footage it was suspended in 2007 after
Hamas took over Gaza Monday's move takes
the EU a step closer to supporting
simpler border crossings but they can't
become a reality without backing from
Israel Egypt and Palestinians for now
the block will keep shipping Aid toward
W the Rafa border from afar with little
guarantee it will get to gazin in need
and the author of that report Rosie
Berard joins us now from Brussels Rosie
are we seeing a shift in the eu's
attitude towards Israel's conduct in the
Gaza
War well listen this is a shift of sorts
if only because the EU has really
struggled to agree on any sort of action
in response to this conflict ever since
those Hamas attacks on October 7th and
that's because the block is divided
between members who on the one end of
the spectrum tend to really be seen as
in solidarity with the Palestinian cause
so that includes for example Spain and
Ireland that recently recognized
Palestinian statehood and at the other
end of the spectrum countries like
Hungary and czechia that are really tend
to be seen as staunch supporters of
Israel and somewhere in the middle
Germany obviously with its historic what
it sees as a historic responsibility to
protect Jewish life so moving forward
the fact that they have decided on
something decided to call for what they
is called an association Council that
does seem to be a shift to me and it
certainly has seems really in response
to this icj ruling the un's top court
and the eu's Foreign Affairs Chief yose
Vell even said on his way into these
talks here in Brussels on Monday that he
felt that presented a dilemma a dilemma
on how to ensure enforcement of that
ruling and respect for international
law the agreement to call that meeting
to call official talks with Israel that
was quite unexpected it was the first
time since October 7th so how exactly
did we get here
Rosie so this is something called an
association Council it sounds like
Brussels jargon but what it really means
is that the EU and Israel have something
called an association agreement it's a
broad agreement a core deal which
governs things including trade so that
is of course a potential key leverage
the EU may have now in terms of what
that means going forward it means that
the EU can call on Israeli officials it
could be for example the prime minister
to come to Brussels to explain how it
complies with the human rights
obligations which are spelled out in
that agreement that Association
agreement Israel doesn't have to
necessarily respond but we know that
there was an association Council held
back in 2022 and it's not the first time
that this talks format has been
politicized there was in fact a decade
of a Hiatus in these official talks when
EU Israeli relations were very St
right up until 2022 and of course now
given the ongoing humanitarian
catastrophes the EU sees that in Gaza
those relations are very much strained
again yeah we heard it in your report
there are a lot of ifs and butts here
how much leverage does the EU really
have how much ability to act quickly if
you
can well the ability to act quickly is
very much confined by these divisions
because the EU could have significant
leverage over both sides it's a major
trade partner of Israel is also a major
donor to the Palestinians but because of
these divisions what we've seen so far
is that the Diplomatic weight has really
laid with Washington on this this
agreement that we had however on Monday
to potentially move forward with
reactivating the eu's border mission at
Rafa that could be something where we
see the EU trying to move from being a
bystander to be more of a broker and
trying to take center stage but I should
say we are still very far off that there
really needs to be a lot more
negotiations to achieve that first as DW
correspondent Rosie Berard in Brussels
many thanks always great to get your
input the health Ministry in Gaza says
at least 45 people have been killed and
dozens more injured in an Israeli air
strike on Rafa Israel says it was
targeting two Hamas commanders there
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu has called the strike on
civilians a tragic mistake and said it
was being investigated the attack came
just days after the international court
of justice ordered Israel to stop its
assault on
Rafa the aftermath of an Israeli air
strike on a refugee camp in
Rafa Hamas officials in Gaza say the
attack killed dozens and injured many
more survivors described what they' just
gone
through we pulled out people who were in
an unbearable State we pulled out
children who were in pieces we pulled
out young and elderly people the fire in
the camp was Unreal most of the
displaced here didn't
survive for the Salman family the strike
means displacement for the eighth
time what am I supposed to do where am I
to go tell me and for how long will this
go on Israel should pinpoint a place for
us and tell us to live or die there this
way does not work how long will we be
disgraced like this
for the Israeli Army said it was
targeting two senior Hamas
commanders Israel's prime minister
Benjamin netan who said the incident was
a terrible
mistake despite our atmost efforts not
to harm non-combatants something
unfortunately went tragically wrong we
were investigating the incident and we
reach conclusions because this is our
policy for us every combatant that is
hurt is a tragedy for Hamas it's a
strategy this is the whole
difference those injured in the attack
were taken to a hospital in central
Gaza and for now Israel continues its
operations in Gaza and that's despite a
ruling by the top United Nations Court
to
stop our correspondent Rebeca ritters is
following the story for us from
Jerusalem Rebecca what can you tell us
about the situation in Rafa after the
attack what about the civilians
there well it's obviously a very
difficult situation Nicole it's really
difficult to get real time information
out of ruer at the moment I have put in
some calls and some messages to the
gazen civil defense I've not been able
to get uh reply but what we do know is
that after this attack we were seeing
the images some of the most horrific
images that I've seen uh covering this
War I must say uh some that are just
simply too graphic to show on the news
to show on our social media channels
some really horrific images and that is
basically what has been happening there
today the cleanup uh has been going on
and been been continuing um civilians
have also been trying to move obviously
away again to safer areas but as we've
seen there are really no safe areas for
them to go this was allegedly uh where
this strike happened or near where this
strike happened was allegedly a safe
Zone that's something that Israel has
denied uh it's difficult to get clarity
on that as well exactly where it
happened as I said this is being
investigated um and and civilians
obviously trying to find just safer
places to go the IDF has reportedly
launched an investigation to find out
what exactly happened there prime
minister Neto has acknowledged that a
tragic mistake had been made what are he
and other Israeli politicians saying
about
this well within Israel uh obviously
this is big a lot of the coverage though
the media coverage hasn't been showing
the same images as we've been seeing
internationally it's not being discussed
in quite the same manner we have seen
that statement or or seen those remarks
from prime minister Benjamin Nyah who
calling this a tragic accident though he
said that this would not change the
course of the war that they would
continue to fight Hamas that they would
continue to search for the hostages uh
they of course have said that they are
going to investigate this preliminary
investigation say that the bomb sparked
a fire they said that uh their
preliminary uh you know looks look into
this when they were preparing to make
this strike to carry out this strike uh
the military says that they did not
believe that any civilians would be
harmed uh of course the investigation
will be going on and the US is also
calling for uh that investigation that
they are also trying to assess what's
been happening with the help of the
IDF the international outcry over this
has been huge Rebecca are there any
fears that this might further isolate
Israel it certainly has been huge Nicole
really across the board we seeing
condemnation the UN has condemned this
and called for an independent
investigation uh the White House has
come out saying this is heartbreaking uh
that it is engaging with the IDF as I
just mentioned to assess the situation
we've seen U Emanuel macron of France
calling this he was outraged we've seen
Ireland's foreign ministers saying this
is a barbaric barbaric Act Norway
Spain's foreign minister uh both of
those foreign ministers I should say
coming saying that after uh the icj
rolling of just a couple of days ago
where it ruled that uh the Israelis
needed to stop their bombardment of Rafa
that this uh makes the gravity of the
attack the gravity of this attack all
the more higher we are seeing this
across the board words like horrific
barbaric um now we have seen similar
outrage to instances in the past
particularly uh in the wake of the
deaths of of those um world Central
kitchen workers Aid workers who were
trying to deliver Aid uh inside the Gaza
STP and they were killed by an Israeli
air strike we saw days of condemnation
but we haven't seen that play uh any
effect as to how Israel is conducting
its War there and as we've seen uh in
the wake of that icj ruling also not
having an effect on the way that Israel
is conducting this war so it certainly
seems that more than condemnation it's
going to take more than Global
condemnation for us to see a change in
the course of this war that was DW's
Rebecca ritters in Jerusalem any thanks